# Phase2.1UtilitiesRPackage
This repository contians R utility functions for Phase 2.1 of the 4CE Consortium.

# Installation

To install this package in R:

``` R
devtools::install_github("https://github.com/covidclinical/Phase2.1UtilitiesRPackage", subdir="FourCePhase2.1Utilities", upgrade=FALSE)
```

# 4CE Phase 2.1 Project Overview

Every 4CE consortium Phase 2.1 project will be associated with 3 separate GitHub repositories.  One will contain the R code to implement the analysis,
and two will be used to store and organize the results from the analyses.  The repositories will be named according to this convention:

`Phase2.1[PROJECT_NAME]RPackage`: the repository that will contain the R code to run the project's analytics

`Phase2.1[PROJECT_NAME]RSummariesPrivate`: the repository where private summary data will be submitted 

`Phase2.1[PROJECT_NAME]RSummariesPublic`: the repository where public summary data will be stored


## Automated Project Creation

The R library (`FourCePhase2.1Utilities`) in this repository contains functions that can automatically create these repositories (both local copies and on GitHub) and pre-populate them with several useful files.  This library has been tested in the 4CE Docker container.  It may run in other R environments, 
exercise left to reader.

To get started, run the Docker container, making the parent directory of where you want to create the R 
package on the host available at `/RDevelopment` in the container.

Here I am just using `/tmp`, you will likely want to use something else:

```shell
docker run --rm --name 4ce -d -v /tmp:/RDevelopment \
                            -p 8787:8787 \
                            -p 2200:22 \
                            -e CONTAINER_USER_USERNAME=testuser \
                            -e CONTAINER_USER_PASSWORD=testpassword \
                            dbmi/4ce-analysis:latest
```

Either connect to the container via ssh and run R, e.g.:

```shell
ssh testuser@localhost -p 2200
R
```

Or connect to RStudio in a web browser (see container documentation).

The latest versions of the 4CE Docker container come pre-configured with this R library installed. To ensure that you have the latest version of this software, however, you should run the following in your R session in the container before proceeding:

``` R
devtools::install_github("https://github.com/covidclinical/Phase2.1UtilitiesRPackage", subdir="FourCePhase2.1Utilities", upgrade=FALSE)
```

In order to perform the following steps you **must** have been granted permission to create repositories under the [covidclinical GitHub organization](https://github.com/covidclinical).  Only members of the 4CE consortium will be granted this permission, and they should request it through the [phase-2 4CE slack channel](https://covidclinical.slack.com/archives/C012UTRHJCR).

In the rest of this example, we will create a new project called "MyAnalysis". This example is for illustrative purposes only.
You should replace "MyAnalysis" with the name of the project that you are creating before running the code.

After having installed the `FourCePhase2.1Utilities` R library (see above), in your command-line R session
you can begin the process of creating the repositories for the "MyAnalysis" project with the following command 
(you will be prompted for your GitHub username and password as the repositories are created and pre-populated):

```
FourCePhase2.1Utilities::createProject("MyAnalysis")
```

If you are using RStudio, you may receive a message that states "The R session is currently busy. Are you sure you want to quit?".  Respond to this by clicking "No".

This `createProject(...)` function call will generate all of the repositories required to support a 4CE Phase 2.1 project.  By default, 
the local copies of these repositories are created under `/RDevelopment/` in the container. You can provide an alternative location by specifying the `workingDirectory` argument to `createProject(...)`.

You would now modify `runAnalysis()`, `validateAnalysis()`, `submitAnalysis()` inside of the 
`Phase2.1MyAnalysisRPackage` repository.  Note that the R package lives in a subdirectory 
of the repository named `FourCePhase2.1[PROJECT_NAME]` (`FourCePhase2.1MyAnalysis` in our example). The `README.md` for your package comes pre-populated with example code to install your package in R from this subdirectory.  You can add as much additional supporting code as you would like 
to your package in additional files, or in the files for these three functions.  For more information on developing R packages in general, see http://r-pkgs.had.co.nz

The R package that was generated by `createProject(...)` contains two functions, `getPrivateSummaryRepositoryUrl()` and `getPublicSummaryRepositoryUrl()` that return respectively the GitHub URLs of the repositories for the private and public summary data for your project.  These may be useful when writing validation and submission code.

To help other consortium members understand and run your code, please include well-thought-out comments and documentation.  Please see http://r-pkgs.had.co.nz/man.html for information on documenting packages and functions using Roxygen.  

Once you are done developing your code, generate documentation using the devtools (Roxygen) package,
with the R working directory set to the package's directory. You don't need to run this in the same R
session as above, in fact, the remainder of this code works fine in RStudio.

Note that we are running this **inside the R package directory within the git repository**:

```
setwd("/RDevelopment/Phase2.1MyAnalysisRPackage/FourCePhase2.1MyAnalysis")
devtools::document()
```

The R package for your project is now ready to push to GitHub to become available to run at the 4CE sites, and you can do so using your 
tool of choice for working with git.  Since the local copies are stored on the docker host's 
storage (if you ran the container with a `-v` option specifying a host file system location, and used that location when calling `createProject(...)`), this can either be done inside the container, or in the host environemt.  If working
in the host environment, you would need to adjust file locations appropriately.

You should consider a more nuanced approach to source control, but to complete the example without 
additional complexity, we will assume that you are staging, committing, and pushing all of your 
code at once.
E.g., from the Linux command line in the container, we would:

Add your changes to staging:

```shell
cd /RDevelopment/Phase2.1MyAnalysisRPackage
git add -A
```

Now commit from within that same directory, substituting the *user.email*, *user.name*, and *message* values appropriately.  The user.email and user.name values can be configured at the environment level rather than specifying them explicitly in the commit invocation.  See git 
documentation for details.

```shell
git -c user.email="my.email@address.com" -c user.name="my name" commit -m "implemented runAnalysis, validateAnalysis, submitAnalysis and generated documentation"
```

You are now ready to push the updates to GitHub.  The repository has already been set up with an appropriate remote.

``` shell
git push -u origin master
```

If all of this has worked correctly, you should be able to visit:

<pre>https://github.com/covidclinical/Phase2.1[PROJECT_NAME]]RPackage</pre>

(https://github.com/covidclinical/Phase2.1MyAnalysisRPackage in our example)

and see the modifications that you pushed.  You can install your package using the code displayed on the README (main) page for the repository, e.g.:

```
devtools::install_github("https://github.com/covidclinical/Phase2.1MyAnalysisRPackage", subdir="FourCePhase2.1MyAnalysis", upgrade=FALSE)
```

Then, from an R session, the user can then invoke functions in your package such as:

```
FourCePhase2.1MyAnalysis::runAnalysis()
```
